Let's talk about the assertion phase.
Remember, a test is a boolean operation.
It only has one result, true or false.
But does that mean that the test should have a single
assertion instead of multiple assertions?
Well, not really.
It means you should have one logical boolean expression.
The number of physical assertions is not important.
Just like a boolean expression,
it can be composed of multiple conditions with ands and ors.
However, a good test should only have one act and assert pair of operations.
What is not right is to act and assert one thing and then act
and assert another thing because we don't want the test to have
one action that passes and another action that fails or that
depends on the first one.
A test should have one action followed by one or more physical assertions
that form a single logical assertion about that action.
We have seen how to use assertEquals,
but JUnit comes with a lot of other methods to evaluate if an
expected outcome has been achieved and even a failed method
to fail the test intentionally.
And if you need more power,
you can use external assertion libraries like AssertJ or Hamcrest.
It's time for a demo.
Let's see how to use some of the assert methods included in JUnit.
This time, we are going to test the RewardByGiftService class.
I have already created a test class with a setUp method and a helper
method to create a sample list with any number of products.
We can start by testing if the correct product ID is set.
In most assert methods, the first parameter represents the expected value,
and the second parameter represents the actual value we got.
In addition,
every assertion method takes an optional string parameter that is
included in the output if the assertion fails.
If you have multiple assertions,
this message can help you recognize which assertion failed or
to better explain what should have occurred.
And if, for some reason, the error message is expensive to create,
you can use a lambda expression to create the
message only if the assertion fails.
Now let's create a test with more than one assertion,
failing the second and third assertions intentionally.
Let's run the class.
One thing to notice is that if one assertion fails,
the remaining assertions won't be executed because to indicate the failure,
an exception is thrown.
But we can use assertAll to wrap assertions in a lambda expression.
And even if one fails, all remaining assertions will be executed.
And all the errors will be aggregated and reported in a MultipleFailuresError,
like this.
The first parameter of assertAll is a message that will be
included in the output of the error.
Let's fix these assertions.
Great.
All tests passed.
Now if we set an invalid product ID,
and for this example, let's consider zero or a negative value and
invalid one, an IllegalArgumentException will be thrown.
So let's test that using assertThrows,
which asserts that the execution of the supplied lambda
expression throws an exception of the expected type.
We can use this specific exception class or one of its parents,
like in this case where an IllegalArgumentException is a runtime exception.
If no exception is thrown or if an exception of a different type is thrown,
this method will fail.
If we want to test no exception is thrown, we can use assertDoesNotThrow.
Either one of them also returns the exception thrown in case
you want to perform additional checks.
For example,
here we can check if the exception message contains the invalid product ID.
We can also use assertTimeout,
which asserts that the execution of the supplied lambda expression
completes before the given timeout is exceeded.
The timeout is given as a duration object so we can
create a duration of seconds, milliseconds,
or nanoseconds, for example.
Here, I now need to show you how the test can fail.
I'm searching for the last product in an order of 50,000 products.
Let's execute the test.
So there you have it.
Execution exceeded timeout of 4 ms by X amount of milliseconds. The
exact time can change every time the test is executed.
As you can see, the execution won't be aborted if the timeout is
exceeded because the lambda expression is executed in the same
thread as that of the calling code.
If we want to abort the operation when the timeout is exceeded,
we can use assertTimeout preemptively,
which also asserts that the execution of the supplied lambda
completes before the given timeout is exceeded.
But with this method, the code is executed in a different thread.
So this time, the execution will be aborted if the timeout is exceeded.
For that reason, in the error message,
we only see execution timed out after 4 ms and not
the total time it took to run.
Let's delete some zeros over here and run the test. There you have it. All tests passed.